केशपाशधृतपिञ्छिकाविततिसञ्चलन्मकरकुण्डलं
हारजालवनमालिकाललितमङ्गरागघनसौरभम् ।
पीतचेलधृतकाञ्चिकाञ्चितमुदञ्चदंशुमणिनूपुरं
रासकेलिपरिभूषितं तव हि रूपमीश कलयामहे ॥१॥
केश-पाश-धृत-	the beautiful lock of hair fixed
पिञ्छिका-वितति-	by a bunch of peacock feathers
सञ्चलन्-	dangling
मकर-कुण्डलम्	fish shaped earrings
हार-जाल-	many beautiful necklaces and garlands
वन-मालिका-ललितम्-	of flowers adorning (the neck)
अङ्ग-राग-घन-सौरभम्	the body smeared with sandal paste and other unguents emitting strong fragrance
पीत-चेल	the yellow silk garment
धृत-काञ्चिका-अञ्चितम्-	fastened by the golden girdle adorning (the waist)
उदञ्चत्-अंशु-	flashing forth rays
मणि-नूपुरम्	gem studded anklets
रास-केलि-	the Raas Dance
परिभूषितम्	adornments
तव हि	Thy indeed
रूपम्-ईश	the lustrous form, O Lord!
कलयामहे	(we) meditate upon
A bunch of peacock feathers adorning the beautiful locks of hair; a pair of fish shaped earrings dangling from the ears; many necklaces intermingled with flower garlands adorning the neck; a golden girdle fastened to the yellow silk garment adorning the waist; sandal paste and other unguents smeared on the body emitting strong fragrance; gem studded anklets flashing forth a glow; on such a radiant form of Thee, with decorations appropriate for the Raasa, we meditate on.
तावदेव कृतमण्डने कलितकञ्चुलीककुचमण्डले
गण्डलोलमणिकुण्डले युवतिमण्डलेऽथ परिमण्डले ।
अन्तरा सकलसुन्दरीयुगलमिन्दिरारमण सञ्चरन्
मञ्जुलां तदनु रासकेलिमयि कञ्जनाभ समुपादधा: ॥२॥
तावत्-एव	then only
कृत-मण्डने	having done the makeup
कलित-कञ्चुलीक-	and put on the bodice
कुच-मण्डले	on the breasts
गण्ड-लोल	dangling on the cheeks
मणि-कुण्डले	the begemmed earrings
युवति-मण्डले-	the group of young women
अथ परिमण्डले	then forming a circle
अन्तरा	in between
सकल-सुन्दरी-	all the beautiful women
युगलम्-	every two of them
इन्दिरा-रमण	O Thou Consort of Laxmi!
सञ्चरन्	moving about
मञ्जुलां तदनु	the beautiful, then
रासकेलिम्-अयि	the Raas Dance O Thou
कञ्जनाभ	Padmanaabha
समुपादधा:	performed
Then only, having done the make up and putting on the bodice on the breasts, and begemmed earrings dangling on the cheeks, the group of young women formed a circle surrounding Thee. O Consort of Laxmi! O Padmanaabha! Thou moved about in between every two of the beautiful women and performed the very beautiful Raas Dance.
वासुदेव तव भासमानमिह रासकेलिरससौरभं
दूरतोऽपि खलु नारदागदितमाकलय्य कुतुकाकुला ।
वेषभूषणविलासपेशलविलासिनीशतसमावृता
नाकतो युगपदागता वियति वेगतोऽथ सुरमण्डली ॥३॥
वासुदेव तव	O Vaasudeva Thy
भासमानम्-इह	resplendent here
रास-केलि-रससौरभम्	Raasa Leelaa's resplendent and fragrant beauty
दूरत:-अपि खलु	from far also indeed
नारद-आगदितम्-	as Naarada described
आकलय्य	having heard
कुतुक-आकुला	(and so) filled with eagerness
वेष-भूषण-विलास-पेशल-	in dressing up with jewellery and in amorous display, experts
विलासिनी-शत-समावृता	beautiful women in hundreds surrounded
नाकत:	from the heaven
युगपत्-आगता	all together came
वियति वेगत:-	to the sky very fast
अथ सुर-मण्डली	then the gods in groups
O Vaasudeva! Naarada described Thy resplendent, fragrant and beautiful Raas Leelaa. Hearing about it from far, groups of gods, full of eagerness came from the heaven and quickly gathered in the sky. They were accompanied by hundreds of beautiful women who were experts in dressing up and in adorning themselves with jewellery and also in amorous display.
वेणुनादकृततानदानकलगानरागगतियोजना-
लोभनीयमृदुपादपातकृततालमेलनमनोहरम् ।
पाणिसंक्वणितकङ्कणं च मुहुरंसलम्बितकराम्बुजं
श्रोणिबिम्बचलदम्बरं भजत रासकेलिरसडम्बरम् ॥४॥
वेणु-नाद-	the flute's key note
कृत-तान-	setting the tune
दान-कल-	giving the sweet
गान-राग-	song (and) raagas
गति-योजना-	flow and rhythm
लोभनीय-	the enchanting
मृदु-पाद-पात-कृत-	soft foot beat making
ताल-मेलन-	(the keeping of) the beats
मनोहरम्	very pleasant
पाणि-संक्वणित-	hands clapping
कङ्कणम् च	and (mingled with the) sound of bangles
मुहु:-अंस-लम्बित-	again and again on the shoulders (of the Gopikaas) placed
कर-अम्बुजं	hands like lotuses
श्रोणि-बिम्ब-	on the waist
चलत्-अम्बरम्	fluttering of clothing
भजत रासकेलि-	meditate on the Raas Dance
रस-डम्बरम्	(with its) enthralling majesty
The key notes of the flute set the tune giving the sweet song and the raagas a flow and rhythm. The soft beat of the feet of the dancers kept time with the very pleasant beats of the music. The clapping of the hands mingled with the tingling sound of the bangles. During the dance, time and again Thou placed Thy lotus hands on the shoulders of the Gopikaas. As they danced about, the clothings on their waists fluttered. On such enthralling majesty of the Raas Dance let us meditate.
स्पर्धया विरचितानुगानकृततारतारमधुरस्वरे
नर्तनेऽथ ललिताङ्गहारलुलिताङ्गहारमणिभूषणे ।
सम्मदेन कृतपुष्पवर्षमलमुन्मिषद्दिविषदां कुलं
चिन्मये त्वयि निलीयमानमिव सम्मुमोह सवधूकुलम् ॥५॥
स्पर्धया विरचित-	(as if )in competition performing
अनुगान-कृत-	the singing one after the other (and) producing
तार-तार-	very loud
मधुर-स्वरे	beautiful strains
नर्तने-अथ	(and) while dancing, then
ललित-अङ्ग-हार-	the beautiful limbs captivatingly (moving)
लुलित-अङ्ग-हार-	displacing on the neck and body the necklaces
मणि-भूषणे	and begemmed ornaments
सम्मदेन	with extreme joy
कृत-पुष्प-वर्षम्-	doing flower showering
अलम्-उन्मिषत्-	not batting the eyes
दिविषदां कुलं	the gods in groups
चिन्मये त्वयि	in the Pure Consciousness, i.e., in Thee
निलीयमानम्-इव	completely submerged as if
सम्मुमोह	and were entranced
सवधूकुलम्	along with their women-folk
As though in competition, the singers raised their voices in successive strains as the musical notes reached higher in pitch. The beautiful limbs of the dancers moved delightfully displacing their necklaces and the begemmed ornaments on their body. The groups of gods watched with extreme joy and showered rains of flowers. Along with their women-folk they watched entranced completely submerged in the Pure Consciousness i.e. in Thee.
स्विन्नसन्नतनुवल्लरी तदनु कापि नाम पशुपाङ्गना
कान्तमंसमवलम्बते स्म तव तान्तिभारमुकुलेक्षणा ॥
काचिदाचलितकुन्तला नवपटीरसारघनसौरभं
वञ्चनेन तव सञ्चुचुम्ब भुजमञ्चितोरुपुलकाङ्कुरा ॥६॥
स्विन्न-सन्न-	sweating (and) tired
तनु-वल्लरी	with a body like a creeper
तदनु कापि नाम	there after some(one) indeed
पशुपाङ्गना	Gopikaa
कान्तम्-अंसम्-	on the beautiful shoulders (of Thee)
अवलम्बते स्म	supported herself
तव तान्ति-भार-	of Thee, (because of) the exhaustion weight
मुकुल-ईक्षणा	(making) half closed (her) eyes
काचित्-	another woman
आचलित-कुन्तला	with dishevelled hair
नव-पटीर-सार-घन-सौरभम्	the fresh sandal paste's intense fragrance
वञ्चनेन तव	slyly ( to smell) on Thy (arm)
सञ्चुचुम्ब भुजम्-	kissed the arm
अञ्चित-उरु-	sprouting big
पुलक-अङ्कुरा	ecstatic horripilation
One Gopikaa, slender and delicate like a creeper, tired and sweating, with drooping eyes out of fatigue, supported herself on Thy beautiful shoulder. Another woman with dishevelled hair, to smell the fragrance of the fresh sandal paste on Thy arm, slyly kissed Thy arm, having horripilation over her body in the process.
कापि गण्डभुवि सन्निधाय निजगण्डमाकुलितकुण्डलं
पुण्यपूरनिधिरन्ववाप तव पूगचर्वितरसामृतम् ।
इन्दिराविहृतिमन्दिरं भुवनसुन्दरं हि नटनान्तरे
त्वामवाप्य दधुरङ्गना: किमु न सम्मदोन्मददशान्तरम् ॥७॥
कापि गण्डभुवि	another one on the cheek area (of Thee)
सन्निधाय निज गण्डम्-	placing her own cheek
आकुलित-कुण्डलम्-	(with) dangling earrings
पुण्य-पूर निधि:-	(she who was) of merits a full repository
अन्ववाप	intook
तव-पूग-चर्वित-	Thy betel chewed
रस-अमृतम्	juice nectar like
इन्दिरा-विहृति-मन्दिरम्	Laxmi's sporting field
भुवन-सुन्दरम्	the most beautiful in all the worlds
हि नटन-अन्तरे	indeed during the dance
त्वाम्-अवाप्य	Thee achieving
दधु:-अङ्गना:	attained the Gopikaas
किमु न सम्मद-	what not joyous
उन्मद-दशान्तरम्	intoxication states
Another one, who was a repository of merits, placed her own cheek on Thy cheek, with earrings dangling on them. She enjoyed the thrill as she intook the nectar like juice from the betel chewed by Thee. The Gopikaas, during the dance, having achieved Laxmi's sport field, Thee, the most beautiful in all the worlds, what states of joyous intoxication did they not attain?
गानमीश विरतं क्रमेण किल वाद्यमेलनमुपारतं
ब्रह्मसम्मदरसाकुला: सदसि केवलं ननृतुरङ्गना: ।
नाविदन्नपि च नीविकां किमपि कुन्तलीमपि च कञ्चुलीं
ज्योतिषामपि कदम्बकं दिवि विलम्बितं किमपरं ब्रुवे ॥८॥
गानम्-ईश	the song O Lord
विरतं क्रमेण	stopped gradually
किल वाद्य-मेलनम्-	indeed the musical instruments
उपारतं	ceased
ब्रह्म-सम्मद-	(in) the Brahmic bliss
रस-आकुला:	(and) joy deeply immersed
सदसि केवलं	in a circle only
ननृतु:-अङ्गना:	kept dancing the women
न-अविदन्-अपि च	and not knowing also
नीविकां किमपि	of the knot of the string (loosening) anything also
कुन्तलीम्-अपि	of the hair (dishevelled)
च कञ्चुलीम्	and of the bodice
ज्योतिषाम्-अपि	of the stars also
कदम्बकं	in their courses
दिवि विलम्बितं	in the sky stood still
किम्-अपरं ब्रुवे	what more than this should I say
O Lord! The singing stopped gradually and the musical instruments also ceased. But immersed deeply in the joy of Brahmic Bliss the women kept dancing in a circle. They were not even aware of the knot of clothing strings loosening or of their bodice having slipped or of their hair being dishevelled. The stars in the sky stood still in their courses, to enjoy all this. What more can I say?
मोदसीम्नि भुवनं विलाप्य विहृतिं समाप्य च ततो विभो
केलिसम्मृदितनिर्मलाङ्गनवघर्मलेशसुभगात्मनाम् ।
मन्मथासहनचेतसां पशुपयोषितां सुकृतचोदित-
स्तावदाकलितमूर्तिरादधिथ मारवीरपरमोत्सवान् ॥९॥
मोदसीम्नि	in the highest bliss
भुवनं विलाप्य	the world engulfing
विहृतिं समाप्य च	and the sport (dance) ending
तत: विभो	then O Lord!
केलि-सम्मृदित-	the sport pressing (exerting)
निर्मल-अङ्ग-	the clean limbs
नव-घर्म-लेश-	fresh perspiration drops
सुभग-आत्मनाम्	on the beautiful bodied women
मन्मथ-असहन-	the Cupid's shafts not being able to bear
चेतसां	(with) such minds
पषुप-योषितां	of the cowherd women
सुकृत-चोदित:-	prompted by their meritorious deeds
तावत्-आकलित-मूर्ति:-	then assuming forms
अदधिथ	(Thou) performed
मारवीर-परम-	an amorously great
उत्सवान्	festivity
The world was engulfed in the highest bliss as the Raas Dance ended. The pure bodies of these women glowed with fresh perspiration drops caused by the dance, and who were unable to bear the shafts of Cupid any longer. O Lord! Prompted by the meritorious deeds of the Gopikaas, Thou assumed as many forms as they were in number and performed an amorously great festivity.
केलिभेदपरिलोलिताभिरतिलालिताभिरबलालिभि:
स्वैरमीश ननु सूरजापयसि चारुनाम विहृतिं व्यधा: ।
काननेऽपि च विसारिशीतलकिशोरमारुतमनोहरे
सूनसौरभमये विलेसिथ विलासिनीशतविमोहनम् ॥१०॥
केलि-भेद-	by sports varied
परिलोलिताभि:-	(who were) exhausted
अति-लालिताभि:-	(and were) fondly caressed
अबलालिभि:	with those women
स्वैरम्-ईश	at will O Lord!
ननु सूरजा-पयसि	indeed (Thou) in the Yamunaa waters
चारु-नाम्	beautifully indeed
विहृतिं व्यधा:	sports performed
कानने-अपि च	(and) in the forests also and
विसारि-शीतल-	(where) spreading cool,
किशोर-मारुत-	gentle breeze
मनोहरे	(was) enchanting
सून-सौरभमये	(filled with) the flower fragrance
विलेसिथ	(Thou) went around
विलासिनी-शत-	(with) the women in large numbers
विमोहनम्	dazing them
O Lord! The women were exhausted by the varied sports and were fondly caressed. Thou performed sports with them at will in the waters of Yamunaa.Thou also went around in the forests where a cool gentle breeze was blowing filled with the fragrance of flowers, which dazed the large number of women with ecstatic joy.
कामिनीरिति हि यामिनीषु खलु कामनीयकनिधे भवान्
पूर्णसम्मदरसार्णवं कमपि योगिगम्यमनुभावयन् ।
ब्रह्मशङ्करमुखानपीह पशुपाङ्गनासु बहुमानयन्
भक्तलोकगमनीयरूप कमनीय कृष्ण परिपाहि माम् ॥११॥
कामिनी:-इति हि	the women in this manner
यामिनीषु खलु	in the nights indeed
कामनीयकनिधे	O repository of all virtues!
भवान्	Thou
पूर्ण-सम्मद-	the immense bliss
रस-अर्णवं	nectar ocean
कमपि	who so ever
योगि-गम्यम्-	yogi (may) attain
अनुभावयन्	making (them, the women) experience
ब्रह्म-शङ्कर-मुखान्-	in Brahmaa Shiva and other gods
अपि-इह्	even, here
पशुप-अङ्गनासु	in (these) Gopikaas
बहुमानयन्	placing respect
भक्त-लोक-	to the devout people
गमनीय-रूप	attainable, of such nature
कमनीय कृष्ण	O Attractive One! O Krishna!
परिपाहि माम्	protect me
O Repository of all virtues! In this manner, Thou made the women experience the immense bliss of the nectar ocean in the nights. Such an experience only yogis may attain. This created in Brahma Shiva and other gods a feeling of respect for the Gopikaas. O Thou attainable to the devout people, of such a nature, O Attractive One! O Krishna! protect me.